---
layout: post
title: FEX 2204 Tagged!
author: FEX-Emu Maintainers
---

A fairly late release this month. @Sonicadvance1 was busy.

That said, this month was fairly slow while other work is coming online.
- CPUID changes so that pressure-vessel/proton can see FEX
- Memory usage optimizations by deleting objects after it is no longer used
- GDBServer improvements to make it slightly better to use
- Various bug fixes. Thanks to the users that reported these.

## CPUID
- Adds 4000_0001h function
  - Allows guest applications to check the hypervisor for FEX-Emu

## FEXCore
- Delete IR after it is used
  - Lowers FEX memory usage
- Fixes https://github.com/FEX-Emu/FEX/issues/1618
  - Could have caused a crash in the signal handler 
- Removes unused debug data

## OpcodeDispatcher
- Fixes SIGILL on unsupported host instructions
- Fixes FNINIT
   - FCW wasn't initialized correctly. Fixes a Visual Novel game engine CPUID initialization code.

## JIT
- Emit identification string in the code buffers
- Adds comment to EmitDetectionString
- Get long divide out of the hot path

## FileManager
- Fix realpath failed on debian buster

## Linux
- Fixes MAP_32BIT supported range

## Scripts
- Updates AArch64 fit for Clang 14

## Softfloat
- Fixes FSCALE

## TestHarnessRunner
- Flush log on asserts

## Misc
- Change page define usages over to self-defined
- Adds missing include

## Termux
- Adds a cmake option for forcing a termux build
- Disables GUI applications in a Termux build

## GDBServer 
- GDBServer improvements: Three's a crowd
- Gdbstub improvements: The sequel
- GDBServer improvements

## Documentation
- Adds hypervisor CPUID information
- Remove stale text
- Update ReleaseProcess docs for Termux

See the [2204 Release Notes](https://github.com/FEX-Emu/FEX/releases/tag/FEX-2204) or the [detailed change log](https://github.com/FEX-Emu/FEX/compare/FEX-2203...FEX-2204) in Github.
