---
layout: post
title: FEX 2210 Tagged!
author: FEX-Emu Maintainers
---

This month's release was a bit delayed due to the fact that most of FEX-Emu's developers were meeting up physically at the X.Org Developer's
Conference this year! Before we talk about this months changes we need to spend a bit of time talking about some cool things.

# FEX-Emu XDC talk
This year FEX-Emu had a talk to discuss some of the weird interactions with Mesa in an emulated environment. You can see the full talk in the embedded
video.
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/BMqQekbs3Mw" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer;
autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

At the end of the video we showed a quick demo of (mostly!) Proton games running under FEX-Emu on a Snapdragon 888 device. You can see this demo
directly embedded below.
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/aU9cWW6rpx4" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer;
autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

# Ubuntu 22.04 Rootfs Mesa update
We have had to update the Ubuntu 22.04 rootfs image with a newer version of Mesa today. Unfortunately our last update with Mesa 22.2 had a bug in the
Raspberry Pi Vulkan driver which completely broke Vulkan on **ALL** devices, not just raspberry pi. We have updated the rootfs today with a mesa git
version of the library to work around this issue. As a benefit, this version of the FEX rootfs includes the new Venus Vulkan 1.3 driver which can be
useful for testing.

Pick up the latest rootfs with the **FEXRootFSFetcher** tool.

# New Lenovo ThinkPad X13s Gen 1 laptops
Last month Lenovo launched a new Snapdragon laptop that is one of the best development platforms that FEX-Emu devs could ask for. This platform is
shipping the Snapdragon 8cx Gen 3 SoC which is one of Qualcomm's most powerful chips. The only downside with this platform currently is that the GPU
doesn't yet work under Linux. There is an ongoing community effort to get the GPU up and running but these Snapdragon chips typically take a while
before support is fully in-place.

Once the GPU works then this will be a perfect platform for testing Adreno with the Turnip Vulkan driver and Freedreno. At that point we will be
shipping out these laptops to all of our devs so we have a good Vulkan development platform.
<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">New <a href="https://twitter.com/lenovoUS?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@lenovoUS</a> ThinkPad X13s
Gen 1 laptops for the whole team. Just waiting for the GPU to come up on Linux before using. <a
href="https://t.co/ic7YBDHk25">pic.twitter.com/ic7YBDHk25</a></p>&mdash; FEX_Emu (@FEX_Emu) <a
href="https://twitter.com/FEX_Emu/status/1579148234974703616?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">October 9, 2022</a></blockquote> <script async
src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

# FEX-2210
Although most of our developers were at XDC, there is no shortage of code that was merged this last month.

## IR changes preparing for AVX emulation
This last month had at least 32 commits preparing our JITs for emulating AVX. While AVX isn't yet wired up, this is still a required step before it is supported. We are still requiring ARM SVE hardware that is shipping with 256-bit wide registers. This means the current consumer CPUs and just announced Neoverse-V2 won't work for our emulation here! This is future-proofing work since more games are requiring AVX to run but we'll just need to live with the problem that we will need new CPUs for the latest AAA games to run under FEX.

## Support clang for thunks
We added support for building our thunks with clang this release. In particular the Ubuntu PPA is shipping this already. This might give a very minor perf increase but the main thing is removing a hard dependency on GCC.

## Add uninstall cmake target
While it is generally advised to not install directly from source building, user tend to still do this.
It was asked multiple times to have an uninstall target so we finally added this convenience feature.

## 32-bit VDSO thunking support
This is FEX-Emu's first 32-bit thunk library! This exercises most of the thunking framework to bring this feature to 32-bit, without some of the harder parts that require data repacking. Now that this is proving that our 32-bit thunking is working, it is likely that we will start working towards getting the rest of the thunks supporting 32-bit as well!

## IR cleanups
While this isn't directly user facing, this makes the JIT IR a bit easier to handle. Making the devs lives easier. We've removed redundant operations that aren't necessary.

## Add support for vixl simulator in CI
While we are waiting for SVE-256bit hardware to get on the market, we need CI to prove that our implementation is correct. We have once again added the vixl simulator to our source tree.
The vixl simulator supports emulating the SVE instructions at whichever register width you want. While stacking emulators isn't good for performance, it *is* good for ensuring correct behaviour.
Sadly ARM's simulator doesn't emulate 100% of the operations correctly, we have had to disable a few of our unit tests in this case; but, it works well enough that it can pick up major mistakes.

## CI functional testing
We have added functional testing of some of our thunks in our CI system. Specifically we are testing our OpenGL and Vulkan thunks to ensure they don't break. Since this is the beginning of functional testing, we currently only run vulkaninfo and glxinfo.
Soon we will be expanding this functional testing to encompass more features which will likely capture even more problems if they come up.

## Map ELF files more like the kernel
The kernel has an interesting behaviour around how it maps ELF files in memory. It will always load the dynamic linker at around the highest address
it can. The primary ELF file will be loaded roughly in the middle of the address space with a bit of ASLR bias. We now emulate the same behaviour in
FEX to help with problems when running WINE. While not all the issues are sorted out, this is a good step towards making it more stable.

## Fix LLVM ASAN
We had an issue with our ELF loading where LLVM ASAN was breaking due to mixing multiple mmaps in the same space. Simple bug with a simple fix. ASAN
all the things!

## SMC deadlock fix
There was a fix to prevent a potential deadlock in our Self-Modifying-Code detection routines. Thanks to the developer that found this!

## Lots of misc fixes this month
It would be hard to list all of the misc other fixes that happened this month. Find out more in our raw release notes!

See the [2210 Release Notes](https://github.com/FEX-Emu/FEX/releases/tag/FEX-2210) or the [detailed change log](https://github.com/FEX-Emu/FEX/compare/FEX-2209...FEX-2210) in Github.
