---
layout: post
title: FEX 2502 Tagged
author: FEX-Emu Maintainers
---

One month later and we have another exciting FEX-Emu release! While we don't have a lot of individual topics, these are some very good usability and
performance improvements to enjoy!

## Fix Steam again
Once again this last month Steam updated its version of their embedded Chromium source. This introduced a behaviour of passing around zero length environment variables.
While this isn't necessary a problem, FEX had mad an assumptions that all environment variables contained at least one character. This minor change in
behaviour results in a crash, preventing Steam from fully starting. With this problem fixed, Steam is once again able to run.

## Multiblock improvements
This is one of the more exciting improvements this month as it increasing both JIT compile performance and JIT runtime performance!
[bylaws](https://github.com/bylaws) this month too it upon themselves to fix bugs that had ended up in FEX's "Multibock" implementation.

The changes:
* Stop multiblock discovery beyond a page.
  * Signicantly reducing the search space.
* Early exit multiblock entries if the instructions are two bytes of zero
  * Highly unlikely to be real code and likely zero initialized memory
* Split blocks at jump target boundaries
  * Significantly reducing the amount of redundant code compilation that occurs
* Ensure our RIP reconstruction can handle large code jumps
  * Fixes crashes in game engines that do faulting magic
* Stop copying the IR after generation
  * While not huge, when compiling hundreds of thousands of entrypoints, it adds up

With the combination of all these changes, sometimes the JIT compilation time can get cut in half with multiblock enabled! Which means we get more
performance, less stuttering, and less crashes when multiblock is in use.

We don't yet enable this feature by default, but it can be enabled in our FEXConfig tool. After a month of dogfooding this feature, we are highly
likely to enable it by default for next month.

## Fix WINE memory allocator behaviour
This was an interesting bug that has technically been in FEX's source for years but only recently got unearthed as a problem. Due to a recent change
in reordering how FEX allocates memory, we started allocating a region of memory that WINE allocates at startup in their preloader. This wasn't
previously an error since WINE was most likely just overwriting some temporary buffer that FEX wasn't actually using. At startup WINE used this memory
region for some heap allocations and expects it to always be available.

The good thing is that this only happened on ARM devices that are configured to use a 48-bit Virtual Address size and due to ASLR it was unlikely to
cause problems. Now in this situation, FEX makes sure to keep its allocations out of the way of x86-64 applications, ensuring that there isn't a
memory conflict.

## Minor optimization for x87 address modes
While hard to say this will be visible in most cases, this showed up in Crysis 2: Maximum Edition's audio thread that was consuming 100% CPU time. This
game's audio thread is so heavy that it completely maxes out a CPU core and drops audio samples. We noticed that for address modes with a small
immediate, we weren't optimizing those to ARM instructions that could do the same. With that fixed, the game is still dropping a ton of audio samples
but hopefully we have more room for improvements there.

See the [2502 Release Notes](https://github.com/FEX-Emu/FEX/releases/tag/FEX-2502) or the [detailed change log](https://github.com/FEX-Emu/FEX/compare/FEX-2501...FEX-2502) in Github.
