---
layout: post
title: FEX 2510 Tagged
author: FEX-Emu Maintainers
---

##  Good bye FEXLoader and FEXInterpreter!

FEX has historically had to methods of invocation: FEXInterpreter, which directly starts emulation of the given program, and FEXLoader, which additionally supports overriding FEX configuration using command line arguments. We also support such config overrides using environment variables like `FEX_MULTIBLOCK` though, so we decided to remove the redundant FEXLoader binary to ease maintenance. With environment variables, per-app configuration files, and the graphical FEXConfig tool for permanent changes, we're covering most use cases.

With FEXLoader out of the picture, we took the opportunity to rename `FEXInterpreter` to just `FEX`. The old name is still available as an alias for now, but we recommend updating any scripts to avoid friction in the near future.

## A small change for building FEX tests

Our build scripts used to have two variables that needed to be set to enable testing: BUILD_TESTS and BUILD_TESTING. Setting the wrong one when toggling tests on or off would have surprising side effects (like CTest running old build artifacts!), so we invested some time to refactor our CMake code and unify the two. In the new release, testing is now controlled using the `BUILD_TESTING` variable, as in any other CMake-based project.

---

See the [2510 Release Notes](https://github.com/FEX-Emu/FEX/releases/tag/FEX-2510) or the [detailed change log](https://github.com/FEX-Emu/FEX/compare/FEX-2509...FEX-2510) in Github.
